Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast,
where we discuss science and science-based tools
for everyday life.
I'm Andrew Huberman,
and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology
at Stanford School of Medicine.
This podcast is separate from my teaching
and research roles at Stanford.
It is, however, part of my desire and effort
to bring zero cost to consumer information
about science and science-related tools
to the general public.
In keeping with that theme,
I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast.
Our first sponsor is Inside Tracker.
Inside Tracker is a personalized nutrition platform
that analyzes data from your blood and DNA
to help you better understand your body
and help you reach your health goals.
I've been getting my blood work done for many years now,
and that's for the simple reason
that only through quality blood work,
and now through the advent of DNA tests,
can one really get a clear picture
of what's going on with their health.
Things like metabolic factors and hormones,
all the various triglycerides,
these are things that can only be measured
from a quality blood test.
And now with DNA tests,
you can get an additional window
into your current health status
and the trajectory of your health.
What's really wonderful about Inside Tracker
is that you don't just get numbers back
about the specific levels of various hormones
and metabolic factors.
You also get a lot of information
about what you could or should do
in order to adjust those numbers
to put you on the course to better health.
So for instance, it will give recommendations
about particular foods to eat or avoid,
particular exercise regimens that you might want to adopt
and the frequency of those regimens
in order to move those markers in the correct direction.
Inside Tracker has also added a new feature
that makes tracking your progress
and analyzing your data even easier.
For those of you that use a Garmin fitness tracker
such as the Garmin watch,
that's now compatible with their platform.
So you can couple your data from your Garmin
with your blood and DNA for even more personalization
and insights on your health.
However, if you don't have a Garmin device,
there's still a lot that you can get
from Inside Tracker and their tests.
If you'd like to try Inside Tracker,
you can visit insidetracker.com slash Huberman.
And if you do that, you'll get 25% off
any of Inside Tracker's plans.
Use the code Huberman at checkout.
That's insidetracker.com slash Huberman
to get 25% off any of Inside Tracker's plans
and use the code Huberman at checkout.
Today's podcast is also brought to us by ExpressVPN.
ExpressVPN is a virtual private network
that keeps your data secure and private.
It does that by routing your internet activity
through their servers and encrypting it
so that no one can see or sell your data.
I'm familiar with the effects
of not securing my data well enough.
A few years back, I had my bank accounts hacked.
I don't know exactly how it happened,
but it happened and it was a terrible amount of work
to have that reversed and secured.
The great thing about ExpressVPN
is I don't even notice that it's running.
I have it on my computer.
I turn it on anytime I work at home or when traveling
or in a cafe, airport, anywhere.
And it runs in the background.
It doesn't change anything about the interface
with my computer or the wifi.
It just secures my data and it secures any information
about what I happen to be searching for, et cetera.
I don't feel like I have anything particular to hide
except my bank account passwords and things of that sort.
But with ExpressVPN, it basically makes everything secure.
You can't be tracked and no one can access
or steal your data, which is terrific.
So again, I use it when I'm traveling and when I'm at home.
If you want to start protecting your internet activity
using ExpressVPN, you can go to expressvpn.com slash Huberman
and you'll get an extra three months free
on a one-year package.
That's expressvpn.com slash Huberman
to get three months free on any of their one-year packages.
Today's podcast is also brought to us by Athletic Greens.
Athletic Greens is an all-in-one
vitamin mineral probiotic drink
that gives you a total foundation of vitamins and minerals
and probiotics to support your health and wellbeing.
I've been using Athletic Greens since 2012.
And so I'm delighted that they're sponsoring the podcast.
I started using Athletic Greens
and I still use Athletic Greens once or twice a day
because it's the simplest and most straightforward way
to get my basis of important vitamins, minerals
and probiotics taken care of.
All of those things combined to support various aspects
of my health, such as brain health, such as gut health.
For instance, there's a tremendous amount of evidence now
showing that probiotics support gut health
and that the gut brain access is important
for things like focus and cognition,
as well as for immune function
and various aspects of physical health like metabolism.
The list sort of goes on and on.
With Athletic Greens, it has all these vitamins and minerals
and various other things that are good for me.
And I actually really liked the way it tastes.
So the way I use it is once a day, sometimes twice a day,
I'll mix it up with water.
I add a little bit of lemon or lime juice.
I think it tastes great without the lemon or lime juice.
But when I add that, it's truly delicious to me.
And I'll drink that first thing in the day,
mid-morning sometimes instead.
And sometimes again in the later afternoon.
I'm able to drink Athletic Greens late in the day
and not have it keep me awake.
If you want to try Athletic Greens,
you can go to athleticgreens.com slash Huberman.
And if you do that, you can claim a special offer.
They'll give you five free travel packs,
which make mixing up Athletic Greens
while you're on the road really simple and easy.
And they'll give you a year supply of vitamin D3K2.
Vitamin D3, as many of you know, you can get from the sun,
but many people,
even if they're already getting a lot of sun exposure,
still have vitamin D3 levels that are too low.
And vitamin D3 is very important for a huge number
of cardiovascular, immune, metabolic,
and other aspects of health.
So once again, if you go to athleticgreens.com slash Huberman
you'll get the five free travel packs
and a year supply of vitamin D3 and K2.
Today is the third episode in our series of episodes
about physical and athletic skill performance
and skill learning in general.
And today we're going to talk about the science
of tools for fat loss.
And fat loss is something that interests
a large number of people.
Many people want to lose fat.
Many people are athletes who need to lose fat.
And in general, we know that having body fat percentages
that are too high is unhealthy for us.
And most people struggle to lose fat.
Most people struggle to lose weight generally,
but most people especially struggle to lose body fat
or what we call adipose tissue.
Now, this is a huge topic on the internet.
There's a lot of controversy.
Today we're going to talk about some things related
to fat loss and that are powerful for fat loss
that I'm guessing most of you have never heard about before.
You may have heard about a few of them,
but I'm guessing you haven't heard about all of them.
This episode is going to be rich with science-based tools
that are gleaned from a variety of aspects
of the literature, including the use of cold,
including brown fat, including something called beige fat.
We're going to talk about something called neat.
We're going to talk about all sorts of aspects of fat loss
that are governed by your nervous system.
And this is, I think, an important gap that's missing
in the discussion about fat loss.
You can hear a lot of information out there
about the role of things like insulin and various diets
like ketogenic diets or vegan diets or Mediterranean diets.
And there's some great stuff out there
and there's some really terrible information out there
and there's a lot of controversy.
We did a number of episodes talking about
the role of hormones on metabolism
and the role of food on mood and wellbeing.
So if you're interested in those topics,
please check them out.
I will touch a little bit on hormones today,
things like insulin and leptin, just a little bit,
but today's episode is mainly going to be focused on
how the nervous system, neurons,
and some of the cells they collaborate with
like glia and macrophages,
how those encourage or can encourage accelerated fat loss
because it turns out they can.
Remember your nervous system,
which includes your brain and your spinal cord
and all the connections that they make
with the organs of the body, governs everything.
It's the on switch and the off switch for your immune system.
It's the on switch and the off switch,
it turns out also for fat burning.
And so the nervous system and the role of the brain
and other neurons has been vastly overlooked
in the discussion about losing fat.
Now, I would be remiss,
and I'd probably come under a pretty considerable attack
if I didn't just acknowledge upfront
a core truth of metabolic science
and also of neuroscience, frankly,
which is that calories in versus calories out,
meaning how many calories you ingest
versus how many calories you burn,
is the fundamental and most important formula
in this business of fat loss
and weight management in general.
There's simply no way around the fact
that if you ingest far more calories than you burn,
you're likely to gain weight.
And a good portion of that weight
is likely to be adipose tissue, fat.
It's also true that if you ingest fewer calories
than you burn, that you will lose weight
and that a significant portion of that
will come from body fat.
What portion?
Depends on the number of factors.
But that simple formula is important.
On a previous episode, I mentioned the complications
with the statement of a calorie is a calorie.
And indeed, there is evidence from, for instance,
Robert Lustig, who's a pediatric endocrinologist
at UC San Francisco,
has talked about how highly processed foods
change the way that we utilize food
and can lead to higher incidences of obesity
and other metabolic syndromes
that go against the idea
that a calorie is a calorie and that's it.
So a calorie is a calorie as a unit of energy,
and we need to accept and acknowledge this calories in,
meaning calories ingested versus calories burned formula,
but the calories burned portion is strongly influenced
by a number of things that you can control
that can greatly accelerate
or increase the amount of adipose tissue
or the proportion of adipose tissue
that you burn in response to exercise and food.
So your hormones are important.
Your thermogenic milieu, meaning how warm
or how cold your body is,
how cold you make it, how warm you make it,
but also your level of metabolism,
your levels of thyroid hormone,
and something that's hardly ever discussed,
but is well supported by the scientific literature,
how much innervation,
meaning how much connectivity there is
between your nervous system and fat.
Today, we're going to talk about the fact
that your body fat of various kinds,
and there are several kinds of body fat,
are actually innervated by neurons.
Neurons connect to your body fat
and can change the probability
that that body fat will be burned or not.
So your nervous system
is the master controller of this process,
and it plays a strong role in the calories out,
the calories burned component.
So as usual, we're going to discuss a little bit of science.
I promise I won't go too deep into lipolysis
and all sorts of things related to fat oxidation.
We're going to break down that process
into two important steps.
And if you can understand those two important steps,
then the rest of the tools will be very straightforward
to understand and manage.
And I do believe that today you will walk away
with many new tools that you could incorporate
into any kind of fat loss regimen
that will greatly accelerate that process
because it's grounded in quality peer-reviewed science.
Throughout the episode,
I'm going to talk about some behavioral tools.
In fact, I'll mostly talk about behavioral tools.
I will also talk about compounds, supplements.
Many of you are into supplements,
some of you aren't, and that's fine.
For those of you that are into supplements,
an important issue in a discussion about supplements
for fat loss or otherwise
is going to be the quality of those supplements
and the accuracy about what's in those supplement bottles
and tablets, et cetera.
I usually mention this at the end of the podcast,
but this podcast, we've partnered with Thorne,
T-H-O-R-N-E, because Thorne, we believe,
has the highest levels of stringency
in terms of the quality of the compounds
in their supplements and the amounts of those compounds.
If you want to see the supplements I take,
you can go to thorne.com slash the letter U slash Huberman.
You can see the supplements that I take.
That will also allow you to get 20% off
any of those supplements
or 20% off any of the other supplements that Thorne makes.
Thorne has partnered with the Mayo Clinic
and all the major sports teams,
so there's a very strong basis for their stringency.
Again, you don't need to use supplements.
I'm certainly not encouraging anyone to use supplements
if that's not your thing,
but if you're going to use supplements,
make sure that your supplement source
is one of very high quality.
With that said, I want to get started
and talk about the various tools for fat loss
and how neuroscience, neurons, control fat loss.
Before I do that, I want to set the context correctly
and extract some of the key takeaways
from previous episodes,
because if your foundation of health
and your foundation of hormones
and your foundation of metabolism isn't right,
it's going to be very hard to get the most
out of any kind of exercise or fat loss protocol.
In previous episodes, I talked all about the science
and the details going into particular protocols.
We don't have time to do that now,
and I want to get to the new material.
However, there are a couple bins,
a couple items that you should make sure
you're getting correctly,
and if you're not perfect about these,
don't worry about it.
Most people are not perfect about them.
I'm certainly not perfect about them,
but we should all be striving to get quality
and sufficient sleep.
I did four full episodes on sleep
and how to get better at sleeping
through things like light exposure, temperature,
timing your sleep correctly for your so-called chronotype
if you're a night owl or a morning person.
That's the first four or I think five episodes
of the Huberman Lab podcast.
Get your sleep right, get your light exposure right,
avoid bright light in your eyes
at times you want to be asleep,
and get bright light in your eyes
at times you want to be awake.
So get your sleep right.
The other thing is essential fatty acids.
I talked about this in the food and mood episode,
but I also talked about it during the hormones episodes.
We need fatty acids.
They are vital to so many aspects of our health.
You don't have to get them from supplements.
You can if you want to,
but you need to get them from your food.
They are essential.
There's a reason there's an E, the essential part there.
Of the fatty acids, there are multiple kinds,
but for the antidepressant effects
or the levels of fatty acids that will promote good mood
and also healthy metabolism
and will start to shift the needle in the right direction
on bloodborne cardiovascular factors,
the key thing is to get the levels of EPA that you ingest
above 1,000 milligrams per day.
So that doesn't mean just taking 1,000 milligrams or more
of say fish oil or krill oil
or whatever your preferred source is.
It means getting above 1,000 milligrams of EPA,
which may require that you ingest more essential fatty acids
than just 1,000 milligrams per day.
That of course can be done through food sources,
things like fatty fish,
or if you're not into eating fish,
you have quality meats that are grass-raised can do that.
There are other sources of essential fatty acids,
of course, also from plant sources.
So look those up online.
It's really easy to find,
but the research and the literature shows
that you want to get above 1,000 milligrams of EPA per day
because that's when you can best support your metabolism
and position yourself for good fat loss.
As well, for people who have cravings issues,
they crave sweets all the time.
I talked about this in the gut brain episode
and hormones and food,
that you have neurons in your gut that are craving,
they're seeking essential fatty acids
and they're craving and seeking amino acids from your food.
Now, these are not supplements that they crave per se,
they're craving those things
because that's what your body needs and your brain needs.
But those same neurons will respond to sugars.
And so many people who are craving sugar
can satisfy that sugar craving
by giving the neurons, so to speak, what they actually want,
which are amino acids and essential fatty acids.
That includes EPA, but also things like glutamine,
an amino acid that can really reduce sugar cravings
if you take a teaspoon of that
or even a tablespoon of that a few times a day.
You have to ease into that a little bit
because some people can get a little bit of GI distress
from too much glutamine.
But glutamine has also been shown
to improve symptoms of leaky gut.
It's a powerful amino acid.
And yes, you can also get it from food.
Things like cottage cheese are high in glutamine, et cetera.
And then finally, you can't really position yourself
to have a strong metabolism
if your iodine levels aren't correct
and your thyroid levels aren't correct.
You can overdo iodine, so you don't want to do that.
A lot of table salt has iodine added to it,
but some people need to add iodine
by ingesting things like kelp, et cetera.
But one of the best ways to support the thyroid system
and metabolism in general
is to make sure you're getting enough selenium,
sometimes called selenium.
Each day, simple way to do that
is to ingest the highest concentration of selenium food
that I'm aware of, which is Brazil nuts.
One or two or three of those per day,
you'll have more than enough selenium
to meet the thyroid needs.
You don't want your selenium to be too high.
You don't want a diet too high in anything.
So again, sleep, sufficient EPAs.
Glutamine, if you have issues with leaky gut
or sugar cravings can really help.
Get your gut microbiome right.
I may have missed saying that,
but get your gut microbiome right.
That does not necessarily mean
you need to ingest probiotics.
You can if you want to,
but you can also just simply ingest a serving or two
of fermented foods per day.
That can greatly assist.
So things like sauerkraut, kimchi,
every culture has a different source
or sources of fermented foods.
Those can really help the gut microbiome.
And then make sure that your thyroid hormone is supported
through the ingestion of sufficient iodine, not too much,
and sufficient selenium, not too much.
Sleep, EPA, glutamine, fermented foods, iodine, selenium.
That sets the basis for how things like exercise, cold
and some of the compounds and other things
that we're going to talk about today
that are I'm guessing truly going to be truly new
to many of you that can really increase the burn factor
in the equation of calories in versus calories burned, okay?
So on the one hand, we have this reality
of calories in versus calories burned.
However, I would also be remiss
if I didn't mention an incredible study
that was done by my colleague, Alia Crum at Stanford.
She's a faculty member, a professor
in the psychology department.
Looking at how belief effects, just thinking,
can impact the effects of things
like exercise on weight loss.
These are just incredible results.
What they did was they took subjects
who were hotel service people that would clean the hotels
and come in and change the linens and so forth,
divide them into two groups.
One group, they were told moving around
and doing your duties for your job,
meet the standards for US guidelines
for activity and movement, et cetera.
And a basic lecture about how movement
is good for you, et cetera.
But mostly just that their daily activities
met the standards for the US.
The other group, however, was given a bunch of information
about how movement and their daily routine
was very good for cardiovascular health.
It could be good for weight loss, et cetera.
And then they tracked these subjects
over a period of many weeks.
The take-home message from this study
was that simply being told that movement is good for you
can lead to weight loss, et cetera,
led to significantly more body fat loss,
waist to hip ratio changes in the direction
that most people would want.
Essentially a slimming down, if you will.
And all sorts of other positive effects
on things like cardiovascular health,
simply by the knowledge that movement and exercise
can help various health markers.
So this is remarkable and it speaks to the power
of the nervous system and the power of belief
in governing aspects of our body and our physiology
that one would otherwise think
were outside our conscious control.
Now, of course, any of you that think scientifically,
which I imagine if you watch this podcast
or listen to this podcast is all of you by now,
probably thinking, well, maybe they just moved around more
or maybe they stood up and sat down more.
Maybe they did something else that was different.
And indeed there's a strong possibility
that they did things differently than the other group.
But the mere knowledge that exercise is good for you,
that movement is good for you shifted their behavior
and their physiology in the direction
of enhanced weight loss, fat loss, et cetera.
So how we think about a given set of activities
affects how we perform those activities
and how we think about and perform those activities
has a real effect on our physiology.
So somewhere between the hard and fast rule
that governs fat loss and weight loss,
which is if you ingest more calories than you burn,
you'll either maintain or gain weight,
typically you'll gain weight, although not always.
If you ingest about as many calories as you burn,
you maintain weight typically.
And if you ingest fewer calories than you burn,
typically you'll lose weight.
That's the kind of rule of fat loss.
And yet we also have these belief effects which show,
and this has been replicated again and again,
that how we think about a process,
whether or not we think it's beneficial
can change our physiology in ways
that can be beneficial to us.
Somewhere in between those two extremes
of hardcore metabolic science and belief effects
lie a bunch of protocols that are grounded
in quality peer-reviewed science and in physiology
that you can leverage to increase the rates of fat loss.
And so that's what we're going to talk about today.
I love this topic,
and it's not that I'm so obsessed with fat loss,
but rather the first project I ever worked on in science
was thermogenesis and fat loss.
I joined a laboratory as an undergraduate
and the guy I worked for loved to explore new compounds
and how they impacted thermogenesis.
And so we looked at how things like MDMA, ecstasy,
how antipsychotics, antidepressants,
various weight loss drugs that were on the market,
how those impacted body temperature
and fat loss and metabolism.
And we just had so much fun doing it.
So if you detect a smile on my face,
that's what that's about.
And I also learned a lot,
and I also came to really appreciate
that this tissue of our bodies, adipose tissue and fat,
we think of as just this unfortunate thing,
this like we're told it's a core energy source
if we ever entered a famine and that's all true, et cetera,
come to realize that these cells in our body,
they are there as fuel for the furnace of our body,
which is our metabolism.
And there's a third player.
And that's where it really gets interesting
that the nervous system, neurons has the opportunity
to turn up the intensity of that furnace.
It has the opportunity to increase the amount of heat
that we produce and therefore the amount of energy
that we burn.
And I was also really intrigued by something
which is that growing up,
I think we all know people who can eat a ton
and never seem to gain any body fat
or people who seem to eat very little
and seem to gain body fat very easily.
And I was always intrigued by that.
And it turns out there are a number of different factors
that relate to that,
but the nervous system is the one that we can really control
both through behaviors and what we eat,
but also in terms of this thing that we call thermogenesis.
There was one particular story I want to relate to you
that does not suggest any protocol.
In fact, I'm going to discourage you
from following this protocol.
Please do not try the compound that I'm about to describe.
One of the favorite things that we like to do in that lab
was to find rare compounds and test them.
And at the time I was reading about thermogenesis
and I learned about a compound that was actually discovered
in the armory factories of World War II.
And it was discovered because women in particular
who were working in these factories
would take a brush and dip it in a compound
or a paint rather.
And they would then paint the numbers with a stencil
onto things like bombs and ammunition of various kinds.
And they were losing weight like crazy.
It turns out that occasionally they'd lick the brush
and then they would go back
just to get a sharper point on the brush.
And then they would paint onto these various bullets
and missiles and so forth, bombs and so forth.
And they started shedding all their body fat.
And many of them lost a lot of weight,
a significant portion of their weight
without changing anything else that they were doing,
what they were eating, et cetera.
Turned out that that compound
is something called dinitrophenol, DNP.
And over the years, dinitrophenol, DNP,
has gained popularity in some niche cultures,
mainly bodybuilders, athletes,
even in the kind of modeling industry,
it is a absolutely terrible compound for anyone to use
because it's highly fatal
if your body temperature goes too high,
hyperthermia will kill you.
And indeed, many people have died using dinitrophenol
as a weight loss drug
or attempting to use it as a weight loss drug.
But dinitrophenol really illustrates a principle,
which is that your metabolism
includes things like thyroid hormone
and growth hormone, et cetera,
but your body temperature and the way you utilize energy
is controlled by your nervous system.
And the way dinitrophenol works is by changing the neurons
and the way that the neurons that connect to fat
change the way fat burns up.
So we are not going to suggest,
I am not suggesting that you use dinitrophenol.
However, there are other things that you can do
that can change the relationship
between these neurons and the fat of your body
in ways that can powerfully accelerate fat loss.
And I don't know why we don't hear about these things more,
but probably because most of what you see out there
on the internet focuses more on what you could eat
and should eat or shouldn't eat.
It concentrates on exercise regimens,
which we will also talk about.
But the burn factor, your thermogenic environment
is one of the, if not the most important factors
in this business of fat loss.
And since I'm a neuroscientist,
that's what we're going to talk about.
So let's talk about fat utilization.
Let's talk about how fat is converted into energy,
which is sometimes also called fat burning.
What I'd like you to know
is that this is a two-part process, okay?
In reality, there are many biochemical steps.
And if you log on to the internet
or you open up a textbook
and you want to learn about fat utilization,
you're going to see a lot of chemistry.
And I'm happy to go deep into that chemistry if you like,
but I think most of you are probably interested
in what are the leverage points?
Where can you exert control over this process
in ways that benefit you?
So I'm going to focus mainly on those, okay?
This is not to upset the aficionados
and I will put in some nomenclature,
but here we go.
There's two parts to this process.
One is fat mobilization.
And the second is fat oxidation or utilization, okay?
So the first thing that has to happen
for body fat to get burned up or used and reduced
is that it has to get mobilized.
And that's a process called lipolysis,
but I actually don't care if you know the name lipolysis,
you just have to move that fat
out of the position that it's in.
You have to get it out of the fat cells, all right?
Fat cells can be visceral around our viscera, our organs,
or they can be subcutaneous under our skin.
Most people are thinking about subcutaneous fat
when they think about fat.
So here's the deal.
And if you want more detail, great.
I'll touch on that in a bit,
but basically stored fat has two parts
that are relevant here.
It's got the fatty acid part,
and that's the part that your body can use.
And that's attached to something called glycerol,
and they're linked by a backbone.
So already probably too much chemistry for both of you,
but what you want is you want to break the backbone.
So if you just can remember to mobilize fat,
you got to break the backbone
between glycerol and these fatty acids, okay?
That's accomplished by an enzyme called lipase,
but you can forget all that if you want.
Remember, we're just trying to mobilize fat.
So the first step is to get those fatty acids moving around
in the bloodstream, to get them out of those fat cells,
and then they can travel and be used for energy.
And that second part, remember, first part is mobilization,
the second part is oxidation,
is then those fatty acids, those are potential fuel.
They're just potential fuel,
but you haven't burned the fat yet.
You've just moved it out of your fat cells.
They're going to go into cells that can use them for energy.
And once they are inside those cells,
they're still not burned up.
You need to oxidize them.
You think oxidation is the burnup part.
They need to be moved into the mitochondria,
and then they can be converted into ATP, into energy.
So just to really zoom out again
to make sure I don't lose anybody,
you got to mobilize the fat,
then you have to oxidize the fat.
You have to, in other words, you have to mobilize it,
then you actually have to convert it into energy.
If you just mobilize it
and you don't convert it into energy, you don't oxidize it,
it can be returned to body fat.
And many of the things that the nervous system can do
is to increase the mobilization of fat,
but also the oxidation of fat, okay?
So you have two opportunities to burn more fat,
and both of those opportunities
are governed by your nervous system,
by neurons that literally send little wires
that we call axons into fat,
and release chemicals that provide a stimulus
for more of that fat to be mobilized,
and then later for more of that fat to be burned up, okay?
So we could go really deep on this,
but I'm not going to go much deeper than that
because this isn't a biochemistry
of fatty acid metabolism lecture.
This is about how to burn fat using your nervous system.
But remember, there's a mobilization step
and then there's an oxidation step.
I think any one of you,
all of you should be able to internalize that.
Mobilize, then oxidize, okay?
Mobilize, then oxidize.
So what are these neurons that connect to fat doing?
What are they releasing exactly?
How do they actually increase fat mobilization
and how do they increase fat oxidation, burning of fat?
Well, there are a couple of things that they release
that encourage that process.
And the main one that you need to know about
is epinephrine or adrenaline.
The conversion of these fatty acids into ATP
in the mitochondria of cells is favored by adrenaline, okay?
And adrenaline is released from two sources.
Adrenaline is released from the adrenal glands,
which sit atop our kidneys and our lower back.
And it's also released
from the so-called sympathetic nervous system,
although that name is a bit of a misnomer
because it has nothing to do with sympathy,
has to do with stimulating alertness
and promoting action of the body.
There's a big mistake in the literature
that is finally being corrected among those who know.
The mistake in the literature is that the adrenal glands
and the release of adrenaline
is what stimulates fat loss and fat oxidation.
In fact, it was thought for a long time
that adrenaline swimming around in your body
of when you're fasted,
because fasting can increase adrenaline,
or when you're engaging in intense exercise
or when you're stressed,
is going to promote fat oxidation.
That's actually not the case.
The adrenaline that stimulates fat oxidation,
the burning of fat,
is coming from neurons that actually connect to the fat,
not hormones like adrenaline
that are swimming around in your system.
It's a local process.
And this is very important
because it means that what you do,
the specific patterns of movements
and the specific environment you create
that can stimulate these particular neurons
to activate fat,
meaning to release fat, to mobilize it,
and then to burn it,
is going to be a powerful lever that you can use
in order to increase fat loss.
So what have we said so far?
We've said that you got to mobilize,
you got to burn fat,
and that your nervous system is in control of that process.
It's not just about calorie deficit.
So let's talk about how to activate the nervous system
in ways that it promotes more liberation,
movement, mobilization of fat,
and more oxidation of fat.
So one of the most powerful ways to stimulate epinephrine,
which is also called adrenaline,
from these neurons that connect to fat
and to thereby stimulate more fat mobilization
and oxidation is through movement.
But I'm not talking about exercise.
The type of movement that I'm referring to
is extremely subtle.
And some of you may be familiar with this type of movement,
but I'm guessing you're probably not familiar
with what I'm about to tell you,
which is that shiver or shivering
is a strong stimulus for the release of adrenaline,
epinephrine, into fat,
and the increase in fat oxidation and mobilization.
But shiver is not just induced by cold.
And there are other subtle forms of movement
that can greatly increase fat metabolism and fat loss.
There was a group in England during the 1960s and 70s
that discovered a pathway
by which subtle forms of movement
can greatly increase fat loss.
This is the work of Rothwell and Stock.
It's very famous in the thermogenesis literature.
And I learned about this early on
when I was an undergraduate.
And I asked, how did they come across this?
And here's how the story goes.
They were aware that some people overeat
and yet don't put on weight.
Other people overeat even just a little bit,
and they seem to accumulate extra adipose tissue.
Now, this is long before all the discussions
about microbiome and hormone factors,
and it was long before many of the hormone factors
besides insulin had even been discovered.
What they did was they examined people
who overate and did not gain weight.
And what they observed was that those people
engaged in lots of subtle movement throughout the day.
In other words, they were fidgeters,
and that's what they call them.
I'm not going to do the British accent version of fidgeters,
but Rothwell and Stock were British.
What they found were people that overeat
but don't gain weight as a consequence.
And in fact, many people who had low levels of body fat
had a lot of resting tremor, not of the Parkinsonian type,
but they would bounce their knee while they were sitting.
When they would talk, they would engage
in very angular movements.
They were sort of electric.
In fact, now in science, I was chuckling about this
as I was diving back into this literature
because the other day I heard a wonderful lecture
on a totally different topic from a colleague of mine,
and we all adore him.
He's over in Europe,
and he's this tremendously successful scientist,
so we like to poke fun at him.
And every one of his movements
is incredibly electric and staccato,
and he's rail thin and he eats like a horse.
And so it fits very well into the discovery
of Rothwell and Stock who discovered that fidgeters,
people that bounce their knee,
people that have a head bob while they're listening,
people that nod a lot,
people that stand up and sit down a lot throughout the day,
and people that pace burn anywhere from 800
to 2,500 calories more than the control group
in the experiments that they looked at.
And indeed, there's been a modern look into all this,
and these numbers check out,
that simply moving around a lot,
even if those are subtle movements,
greatly increases the amount of energy that you burn.
And people who overeat,
the people who can have the second or the third donut
or donuts at all,
and don't seem to put on weight to the same degree,
they are people that move around a lot even when seated.
They're people that will often move their limbs
very quickly as well.
There even have been studies
that have explored other things
that correlate with fidgeters.
Fidgeters stand up very quickly at the end of a lecture,
or they start to gather their things very quickly,
whereas non-fidgeters don't.
So dogs like my bulldog Costello,
definitely not a fidgeter.
Every movement is incredibly slow and deliberate.
Sitting down is a process.
If you ask him to sit down, it's sort of a slow motion.
You ask him to get up,
and he kind of looks at you, sighs, and stands up.
The fidgeters are the opposite of that, right?
You say, how are you doing?
They go, great.
So even sometimes their speech will be accelerated,
although not always,
but staccato movements, fidgeting, et cetera.
And in 2015, and again in 2017,
there've been studies that have explored this
using some modern metabolic tracking.
And indeed, simply moving a lot,
being a fidgeter, bouncing your knee,
standing up and pacing several times
or many times throughout the day,
led to considerable amounts of fat loss and weight loss
when people were ingesting the same amount of food.
If they overate,
they were able to compensate and burn off that food.
And if they were trying to lose weight,
and they incorporated this fidgeting protocol
of deliberately trying to fidget more
and move around during the day,
pace, stand up more quickly, sit down more often,
sit down and stand up more often rather,
they found that they greatly increased their weight loss
anywhere from 20 to 30% increases.
And in some cases,
there are always those few people who burned a lot more.
It seems to work best
in people who are already slightly overweight.
So for people that are overweight,
who are kind of averse to exercise,
fidgeting might actually be a good entry point.
And 800 to 2,500 calories
is a considerable amount of calories
when you really think about it.
Now, why am I telling you this?
Well, there's clearly a tool to export from this,
which is that you can increase the amount of calories burned
without having to go on additional long runs.
I do hope that people are exercising regularly
because it's so important for other aspects
of brain and body health.
But nonetheless, we are all time limited
and we are not all so ready to embrace exercise.
I have a family member
who has been slowly coaxed into exercise.
But if I were to tell her, for instance,
you need to fidget more, she'd probably go for it.
So this is a powerful way
to increase the calories that are burned.
Now, that's great.
And you can think about the protocols,
but I want to nest that protocol in what I said before,
which is that fat is controlled by these neurons
and the epinephrine they release.
You might say, well,
how could these little micro movements
lead to so much caloric burn?
And that's where it really gets interesting.
Rothwell and Stock and others that they worked with
subsequently found that these little fidgety movements,
the engagement of certain aspects of our musculature
that are nothing like exercise,
it's not these large coordinated or rhythmic body movements,
but rather subtle little bits of fidgety movement.
And here I am doing a lot of fidgety movement.
As an example, tapping the pen, this kind of thing.
I was probably that kid in class most of the time.
I was like, I try not to do it to irritate people,
but I was definitely a knee bouncer.
I'm not particularly lean or not,
but I was definitely, this is a common activity for me.
People that do that sort of thing,
it turns out that it's not the kind of caloric burn
that we normally think of, of like,
oh, you're running, lifting weights, swimming, yoga, et cetera.
Those subtle movements of our core musculature,
not just the core, but all our limbs and our musculature,
those low level movements,
they trigger epinephrine release from these neurons
and they stimulate the mobilization of fat.
And then that fat is oxidized at higher rates.
And I find this fascinating.
I wish more people knew about it,
which is why I'm telling you about it today.
This has nothing to do with exercise
in the traditional form.
And yet 800 to 2,500 calories per day,
that's a considerable amount of fat oxidized.
If you are in a calorie maintenance mode
or if you're sub caloric,
that's going to add to still additional fat loss.
The data on this are tremendous.
I'll link to a few studies.
If you're really interested in learning
about what's called NEAT, N-E-A-T,
which is non-exercise activity thermogenesis, NEAT.
So what's the protocol?
Fidget.
If you're really interested in burning calories
and you already exercise, you want to burn more,
or you don't have the opportunity to exercise
or you're a versed exercise for whatever reason,
fidgeting movements, staccato movements, standing up,
walking around, pacing, all the sort of nervous activities
that we're so critical of in other people
and sometimes in ourselves are actually mobilizing
and oxidizing a lot of fat and a lot of energy.
And while this probably won't compensate
for chronic overeating,
the caloric burn from this is considerable
and very likely can offset a meal that had excessive
calories or a kind of steady state of eating too much.
And it also starts to open up all sorts of thoughts
and discussion about when you travel,
you tend to eat foods that are outside your normal ones.
We tend to eat foods that aren't so great for us.
We also tend to be a little bit more sedentary
when we travel, we're on the plane, et cetera.
But all of that aside,
just the use of something like low-level movement
and it's almost like a tremor,
but also these like short, small fidgety movements,
I'm intentionally doing a lot of these today
so you have examples that you can use
that to select from if you like,
these can have a major effect on fat loss.
And it raises a second tool.
If these low, meaning these small movements
that we engage in trigger epinephrine,
adrenaline release from these neurons
of the sympathetic nervous system that innervate fat
and increase fat mobilization and oxidation,
now it should make sense why shivering
is one of the strongest stimuli
that one can incorporate to stimulate fat loss.
Now shivering is almost always associated with cold.
We think shivering, we think cold
because when we get cold, we shiver.
And there are two ways that shivering can increase fat loss.
And there are several ways that you can use shivering.
You can leverage shivering
and you can leverage cold to accelerate fat loss,
but you have to do it correctly.
And most of the people that are using cold
and frankly suggesting cold
as a means to increase metabolism fat loss
are suggesting the exact wrong protocol.
In fact, the one I'm going to recommend
is 180 degrees in the opposite direction
to the typical protocol that you'd hear about.
So let's talk about how to use cold
and how to leverage shiver
as a particularly strong stimulus to increase fat loss
through mobilization and oxidation of these fatty acids.
So in recent years, there's been a growing interest
in the use of cold for various things
like improving stress tolerance,
improving metabolism, recovery from exercise.
I've talked about a number of those things
and the uses of cold on this podcast.
In fact, did an episode on how to supercharge performance
through palmer cooling, cooling the palms in specific ways
or the bottoms of the feet.
And if you're interested in that
and how to improve performance in endurance and strength,
you can check out that episode.
But most people out there are using cold exposure
typically by taking cold showers
or by getting into cold water of some other kind,
a lake or a river or a cold bath or an ice bath.
And they are doing that probably with mixed goals,
meaning they both would like to increase their metabolism
and burn fat as well as improve mental resilience.
Since today we're talking about accelerating fat loss
through the use of science-based tools,
I want to emphasize a study that was published in Nature
just a couple of years ago
showing exactly how cold increases metabolism and fat loss.
So we have several kinds of fat, three kinds in fact.
We have white fat, white adipose tissue,
and we have brown fat or brown adipose tissue.
And there's a third kind, which is beige adipose tissue.
White fat is the type that we traditionally think of
as fat, subcutaneous fat.
And it is not particularly rich in mitochondria,
it is there as an energy storage site.
And we have to mobilize the fat out
as we talked about before and burn it up elsewhere.
Brown fat largely exists between our shoulder blades
and on the back of our neck, between the scapulae.
And it's rich with mitochondria,
which is why it's called brown fat.
And brown fat has a particular biochemical cascade
whereby it can take food energy,
and it can take food basically,
break it down and convert it into energy within those cells.
And there's some additional steps involved,
but unlike fatty acids from white fat,
which have to travel elsewhere,
get broken down in mitochondria
and convert into ATP, et cetera,
used by the mitochondria rather,
brown fat is thermogenic.
It can actually use energy directly.
It skips a step and I don't want to get diverted
by going into all the biochemistry of it.
Beige fat is sort of in between.
It's white fat that could be brown fat
because it has some mitochondria in it,
but not as many as brown fat.
Now, cold exposure does several things.
Making ourselves cold can allow us
to build up mental resilience
because getting into cold of any kind,
doesn't matter if it's a cryo chamber,
doesn't matter if it's a cold day
and you forgot your sweater or your parka.
It doesn't matter if it's an ice bath
or you're lying down in the snow.
Cold causes the release of adrenaline from your adrenals
and it causes the release of epinephrine
from these neurons that connect to fat.
Now, the big effects of cold on metabolism and fat burning
are going to be through two routes.
One is that if you expose yourself to cold,
you have the opportunity to trigger activation of brown fat
as well as to convert more beige fat into true brown fat.
So you essentially create a stronger or a hotter furnace.
That's the way to think about brown fat.
It's like a furnace.
And so with this principle that we started with
of calories in versus calories burned,
what you're doing is you're increasing
the amount of burning,
you're increasing the burn of energy
by increasing the intensity of the heat inside you,
so to speak, okay?
I'm talking here kind of metaphorically.
Now, how can you do that?
Well, if you get into cold water or an ice bath
or a cold day and you try and remain calm
and resist shivering, you actually short circuit
this mechanism for increasing brown fat thermogenesis.
The paper published in Nature shows that it is shivering
itself that causes the brown fat to increase your burning,
your burn rate and your metabolism.
And it works like this.
When you get into cold and you shiver,
the shivering, that low level movement of the muscle,
those small movements,
triggers the release of a molecule called succinate,
S-U-C-C-I-N-A-T-E, succinate.
And succinate acts on the brown fat
to increase brown fat thermogenesis and fat burning overall.
It actually increases body heat
through this brown fat thermogenesis pathway.
And it also over time can increase the amount of brown fat
by converting beige fat into true brown fat.
Now, how much cold exposure and how often, that's the key.
But before I give that detail or set of details,
remember if you resist the shiver,
you are not going to get the increased metabolic effect
because you are not going to get the succinate release.
So if you want to get your body heat,
your thermogenic level to go up, you need to shiver.
So now we have the NEET,
the non-exercise activity thermogenesis.
So low levels of activity as I described before,
which are done away from cold,
maybe do them in cold as well,
as well as shiver in response to cold.
And so the shiver itself is valuable
for triggering the release of succinate.
In fact, succinate is being evolved now
by various drug manufacturers
as a potential treatment for obesity,
although it hasn't really hit the market
in its final form yet.
Succinate is powerful for its effects on brown fat.
So how many times a week
do you need to expose yourself to cold?
Well, depend on how much fat you're trying to lose
and how much you're trying to increase your metabolism.
There are studies that describe positive effects on fat loss
of exposing yourself to cold,
either through cold shower or through ice bath
or other cold water.
It doesn't have to actually have ice in it
provided it's cold enough for any time,
anywhere, excuse me, between one and five times per week.
But it turns out that just one exposure per week
can be valuable.
The question then is how long
to get into that cold environment
and how cold should that environment be?
So first let's talk about
how long to get into that cold environment.
The answer here might be a little bit different
than you might imagine.
Most of you might think,
oh, well, if one minute is good, three minutes is better,
and if three minutes is better, then 10 minutes is best.
But remember, the goal is to get
the shiver-induced release of succinate
so that succinate can trigger the brown fat.
It turns out that if you want to trigger the shiver,
what you want to do is to get into the cold
and then get out of the cold and typically not dry off
and then get back into the cold and out of the cold.
That will definitely stimulate more shivering
than just getting into the cold itself.
So what I'm not referring to
is getting into the cold environment like an ice bath
and waiting until you shiver and staying there shivering.
You also don't want to get hypothermic,
and I want to be clear,
you want to get approval from your doctor
before you do any of this.
When you get into cold water,
there are two factors that will dictate
whether or not you shiver, probably three,
but let's just talk about the main two.
One is how cold it is.
So how cold should it be?
And look, if you get into water that's very, very cold,
it can actually shock your heart.
It can actually give you a heart attack
if it's truly, truly ice cold
and you're not adapted to that.
So proceed with caution, please.
I'm not a physician and I don't want to see anyone get hurt.
Just cold enough to be uncomfortable
is a good place to start.
So for some of you, that's going to be 60 degrees.
For some of you, that's going to be 55 degrees.
For some of you, it's going to be high 30s, right?
Depends on how cold adapted you are
and people vary in terms of how well they tolerate the cold.
So what you need to do is find a temperature
that you can get into one to five,
probably one to three times a week
if you really want this to accelerate fat loss
and you want to get in until you just start to shiver
and then you want to get out and not dry off.
Wait anywhere from one to three minutes
and then get back into the cold.
Now you'll notice when you get back into the cold,
it'll almost seem soothing.
It might actually not induce shiver.
It might take away the shiver that you had.
So here's a potential kind of sets reps protocol
that you can play with.
Find a temperature that induces shiver for you.
That's going to vary depending on your cold tolerance
and how cold adapted you are.
One to three, maybe five times a week,
get in until you or get under the shower or whatever it is
until you start to shiver, genuinely shiver.
Then after about a minute or so, get out,
spend one to three minutes out but don't dry off,
get back in for anywhere from one to three minutes
but try and access the shiver point again.
And you might do three repetitions of that.
So it's three times in and three times out total, okay?
That's a great starting place.
And what you don't want to do is build up your tolerance
to cold so fast that pretty soon you're able
to resist the shiver because remember the shiver
is the source of the succinate release
that will trigger brown fat thermogenesis.
So if you'd like to see this protocol spelled out,
you can access it zero cost at a website
which is thecoldplunge.com.
The Cold Plunge is a company, they make cold plunges
and they were kind enough to gift one
to the Huberman Lab podcast.
But I want to emphasize that these protocols
are free of cost.
The folks at the Cold Plunge are not just interested
in marketing their product but one of their main interests
is encouraging people to engage in cold exposure
for particular endpoints and goals like fat loss,
resilience, et cetera, resisting inflammation.
But their main focus is providing people protocols
and encouraging people to use cold exposure
of various kinds, not just through their products
but through cold rivers and jumps in the ocean
and things that cold showers, whatever is most convenient
and accessible for various people.
And so we needed a place where we could house
these protocols in a permanent way.
And not just for this episode,
so what they've agreed to do is to post the protocols there.
They should be very easy to find on their website.
This particular protocol we're referring to
as the fat loss optimization protocol
for lack of a better name.
And it's really grounded in how cold can be used
to induce shiver.
And again, it doesn't really matter
how you're accessing that cold
provided you access the shiver
and you're moving from the cold environment
to a slightly warmer environment.
So getting out of the cold shower
or getting out of the ice bath, et cetera
or out of the cold plunge and then back in
because it turns out that the cooling
and rewarming process of the body is where shiver kicks in.
And so that's distinctly different
than just trying to get into the cold
and stay in the cold for as long as possible.
And if you zoom out a little bit
and think about some examples in life,
you'll understand why that must be the case.
For instance, people who do a lot of cold water swims,
you have these polar bear clubs,
I think they call themselves,
do these cold water swims.
I would sometimes see these people
swimming back and forth to Alcatraz and stuff like that,
which just seems risky.
And they tell me it's very stimulating
for the mind and body, great.
Sometimes those people are very lean,
oftentimes they're not.
And they're getting a lot of cold exposure.
And one of the things that happens
is if you expose yourself to cold over and over,
you adapt, you become cold adapted.
And when you do that, you no longer get the epinephrine,
the adrenaline release from the cold.
And therefore you don't get the succinate release
and the shivering and the brown fat thermogenic effect
quite as intensely.
So if you want to use cold for other reasons,
and certainly cold water swims can be fun
and as long as you can do them safely, they're great.
I've gotten into cold water swimming
for some period of time.
You can use cold for resilience, et cetera.
But if you want to use cold to increase fat loss,
then getting this shiver process going,
the cooling and rewarming,
which accelerates the amount
or increases the amount of shiver,
that's going to be the way to go.
One note about cold and some of the factors
that it releases.
A few years back, there was a lot of excitement
about this hormone called irisin, I-R-I-S-I-N,
which was associated with cold.
And there was a lot of excitement about its potential role
in increasing metabolism,
so much so that people were starting to explore this
as a potential fat loss drug.
To my knowledge, that went nowhere.
The science eventually shifted over to succinate
as the main factor in cold-induced thermogenesis
through this brown fat pathway.
But if anyone out there is aware
of any positive effects of irisin
or of any science of irisin that I'm overlooking here
or that I'm speaking about incorrectly, please let me know.
I'd be very curious to learn.
Now, I want to just talk about brown fat a little bit more
and talk about a period in your life
in which you were rich with brown fat,
you had a ton of brown fat,
and that's when you were a baby.
Babies can't shiver.
These neurons that release epinephrine into fat
are not wired up and really aren't present
at sufficient levels or in sufficient numbers
when you are a baby,
and therefore you can't shiver as a baby
and you can't warm yourself up
in cold environments very well.
To compensate for that,
mother nature installed in all of us
an excess of brown fat early in life
that exists again in the upper back,
in the middle of the back, and the back of the neck.
Over time, if we don't expose ourselves to cold environments
or do other things that make us shiver,
we lose a lot of that brown fat.
But what's interesting about brown fat
is that there's some evidence that brown fat,
just like white fat, can both increase in size,
but that you can also add new cells.
Now, this is a little bit controversial.
People always say you can't change the number of fat cells.
You can just shrink them or increase their size.
Well, it turns out that epinephrine released
from these little nerve endings in brown fat
and succinate circulating in the body may,
and I want to underscore may,
have the effect of increasing the amount of brown fat cells
probably by converting these beige fat cells into brown fat.
So that allows us to become much as we were early in life
where we metabolized like crazy
and we'd heat ourselves up without shivering.
Some people have taken the cold thing to the extreme,
putting ice packs on the back of their neck
throughout the day,
did a episode all about testosterone and estrogen,
and there's this, let's just call it a very niche,
I have to imagine very, very niche culture of people
who are wearing literally, I'm not joking,
they are these cool pack ice pack underpants.
They go by a name that I'm not going to repeat on here,
but you can find them on Amazon.
Those are people that are using cold packs on the body
and on the groin to try and increase things like testosterone
but as well to try and increase thermogenesis
and trying to increase their metabolism.
Just remember, if you become cold adapted,
you're not going to get the fat burning effects
to the same degree.
So cold is a powerful tool for fat loss,
but you don't want to adapt.
This is reminiscent of a rule that you hear about
in endurance exercise and in strength exercise as well,
which is that you want to use the minimal effective stimulus
to promote growth or progress,
so growth of the muscle or improvements in endurance.
If you go 10% further on a run or 10% faster,
you will likely see an improvement in performance
provided you recovery the next time you come back
and do that same round of exercise.
You'll be able to do more work
or complete the work more easily, et cetera.
You've adapted.
If you do 20% more distance or 20% more weight,
you won't necessarily see the same commiserate level
of gain or improvement.
And so likewise with cold,
if you're quickly moving from 30 seconds of exposure
to 10 minutes of exposure,
you're overlooking the opportunity
to get the most fat loss and increase in metabolism
by stepping it up in smaller increments, okay?
And this also speaks to the rationale
for using cold exposure to accelerate fat loss
for certain periods,
but then maybe not doing it year round
if fat loss is your goal.
Maybe use it for two, three months at a time
and then stop for two, three months at a time
because it is such a potent stimulus
provided you engage in the shiver.
Next, I'd like to move to exercise
and how particular timing and types of exercise
can vastly improve fat loss.
Before I do that,
I just want to mention a really important reference
for those of you that are interested
in learning more about how neurons connect to fat.
This is certainly a paper that you'd want to look at
if you're interested in diving deep into the literature
and reading all the various studies.
It's a review and the title of the review
is neural innervation of white adipose tissue
and the control of lipolysis.
That's neural innervation of white adipose tissue
It was published in Frontiers in Neuroendocrinology.
You can find that free online.
They have the full text available.
The first author is Bartnes, B-A-R-T-N-E-S-S.
It's a great review.
And I've talked about a number of things
that are mentioned in the review.
Follow the references in that review
and the reference trail, as we say,
if you're interested in learning more about
also how neurons control brown fat.
And before I move to exercise,
I also just want to highlight something
that comes up every few years
and has largely been considered myth now,
but that is actually more interesting
than most people might think,
which is this issue of spot reduction.
In the 80s and 90s, there were a lot of commercials,
late night infomercials where they would talk
about spot reduction.
If you do sit-ups, will you lose abdominal fat?
If you do hip raises or glute raises,
will you lose glute and hip fat?
And I think everybody now believes that
and understands that fat metabolism
is something that happens systemically throughout the body,
that some body fat is quote unquote,
more stubborn than others.
Everyone varies in where they tend to store fat
or lose fat last.
Number of factors that influence that
and in particular hormone receptors.
But now, at least in the scientific literature,
spot reduction and the possibility
of real true spot reduction,
reductions in fat in a targeted way,
a body part or body area targeted way
is becoming more of a reality and may be a reality soon
because exercise that triggers the activation
of these nerve fibers, these neurons that innervate fat,
in theory, if you can increase the amount
of epinephrine released at those particular fat pads,
as they're called, they're actually called fat pads
in the scientific literature,
in theory, you could increase mobilization
from those particular body fat sites.
So because the new view, the modern understanding
is that it's not adrenaline released systemically
kind of bathing all your fat tissue,
but rather it's neurons releasing adrenaline,
epinephrine locally, that in theory,
exercise that stimulates the release of epinephrine
or exercise coupled with things like shiver
or low grade shaking movement or the NEET,
the non-exercise activity thermogenesis could in theory lead
to local enhancement of mobilization of fat tissue.
So I think that spot reduction actually will soon
be something that's possible
using the appropriate technology.
What does this mean for you now?
What could you possibly do with this information now?
Well, I think it speaks to the fact
that if one is going to engage in exercise,
that doing exercises that involve lots
of different body parts and movements
is likely to encourage the maintenance
and or growth of these neurons
that innervate fat throughout the body.
What this means is changing up the pattern of exercise,
engaging in novel types of movements
may actually be one way that one can access
these so-called stubborn body fat pads.
Now there's a little bit of speculation
in the statement that I'm making,
but if you think about it, it makes sense.
If you become very adapted
to a particular pattern of exercise,
whether or not you're subcaloric or not,
you're in maintenance calories or not,
you are oxidizing some fat always,
and you're utilizing the neurons that innervate fat
in a regular way and pretty soon,
this innervation is going to shut off
because there's no reason why this neural innervation
of fat should continue to release epinephrine
unless you give it a strong stimulus like cold
or the fidgeting or in this case
to do novel forms of exercise.
And there's some anecdotal evidence
and there I don't even want to call it data,
but anecdotal evidence that people
who have quote unquote stubborn body fat,
if they start to adopt new patterns of exercise,
they can start to access those stubborn fat pads.
And again, fat pads is the correct way
to refer to these in the scientific literature.
So what we're focusing on today is the fact
that fat indeed will be mobilized and oxidized
in response to a deficit in calories,
but that the way that neurons control those fat pads
and those body fat stores afford you a lot more control
than perhaps you ever previously thought.
So let's talk about movement
and the more traditional kinds of movement,
AKA exercise, has been shown to lead
to increases in metabolism and fat loss,
to greater degrees, depending on whether or not,
for instance, you're fasted when you do it or not,
whether or not you do your cardio first
or your resistance training first.
And this is, again, in the literature
for which there's a lot of controversy,
but in digging through all the studies on this,
we're finally starting to arrive at a consensus
of when is best to do exercise
and what types of exercise to do if your goal is fat loss.
The topic of exercise is a kind of controversial one,
not as controversial as nutrition and diet,
which we will talk about in a few minutes,
but it's a particularly interesting one
because different types of exercise
engage the musculature of the body
and the heart and the lungs in different ways
and can have vastly different effects
on things like hormones and metabolism,
depending on whether or not it's of high intensity,
moderate intensity, or low intensity.
So rather than think about weight training
versus cardiovascular exercise,
I think the most simple way,
the most fluid way to have this conversation about exercise
and fat loss is in terms of three general types of training,
whether or not it's done with weights or body weight
doesn't really matter.
And those are high intensity interval training,
something that seems to have gained a lot of popularity
in recent years, so-called HIIT, H-I-I-T,
so high intensity interval training,
sprint interval training,
so that's going to be very high intensity or S-I-T,
or moderate intensity continuous training, M-I-C-T.
So we've got HIIT, SIT, and MICT, M-I-C-T.
And we can get a little bit more precise if you'd like.
I'm not somebody who measures my VO2 max or anything
while I exercise, I generally know
whether or not I'm doing something
I could continue for a very long time
or whether or not I'm doing something that
I realize is going to be of short duration, high intensity.
But if you'd like to map this to VO2 max,
SIT, this sprint interval training
was defined as all out,
greater than 100% of VO2 max bursts of activity
that lasts eight to 30 seconds,
interspersed with less intense recovery periods.
So this would be sprinting downfield for eight to 30 seconds
then maybe walking back for about a minute or two
and then sprinting again and then continuing.
So that would be SIT.
HIIT, H-I-I-T, is defined as submaximal,
so 80 to 100% of VO2 max bursts of activity
that lasts 60 to 240 seconds
interspersed with less intense recovery periods.
So on a standard 400 meter track,
just to give us a little bit of a visual,
you'll one, a four minute mile would be fantastic
for most people,
although people run faster than that, of course.
So that's four 60 second laps,
but that's back to back to back.
I think in my best shape or maybe it was in my dreams,
I don't recall which,
I was able to do 60 seconds around the track,
but of course I couldn't get that
on the second or third or fourth.
If I did, that was certainly in fantasy land and not reality
but 60 seconds would be about one revolution
around the track, maybe 90 seconds,
depending on how fast one is running.
So 60 to 240 seconds, MICT, okay?
This moderate intensity continuous training
is steady state cardio,
sometimes called zone two cardio these days
on the internet,
which is performed continuously for 20 to 60 minutes
at moderate intensity of 40 to 60% of VO2 max,
or if you prefer heart rate,
55 to 70% of max heart rate, okay?
So we can think about high, medium,
and low intensity exercise.
Although low intensity usually means
that you could carry on a conversation
or maybe you'd have to gasp every few steps or so
while trying to talk and run.
That's, I think, going to be the most useful way
to have this conversation that we're having now
because there's so many different forms of exercise
that people do and intensity is important.
Let's ask the question that I think many of people
are wondering about, which is, is it better,
meaning do you burn more fat
if you do your exercise fasted?
And fasted in this respect could be
that you wake up in the morning,
you've been fasting all night,
you just hydrate and you exercise,
or sometimes people will ingest caffeine,
there's controversy as to whether or not
that quote unquote breaks the fast,
has to do with whether or not your caffeine adapted
something for another episode.
In any case, that would be fasted.
So probably not having eaten anything
for anywhere from three to 24 hours or maybe even more.
As you could also be fasted in the afternoon
if you had lunch at noon and it's four or five or 6 p.m.,
is it, will you burn more fat if you exercise
without eating anything first,
without ingesting any calories first?
And people have tried to really split hairs
on this every which way.
People say, well, you can fat fast
because fat and protein doesn't lead
to as great increases in insulin as other things.
Maybe you can have a few almonds and then still train.
And indeed, insulin will prevent fat oxidation.
I want to be really clear.
The burning part of fat in the cell,
the movement of the fatty acid into mitochondria
and the conversion to ATP, insulin inhibits that process.
However, it's been shown
that at least for short periods of training,
it doesn't really seem to matter
whether or not you eat before training or you don't
if your goal is fat oxidation.
Now, I want to put an asterisk near that
because there are some exceptions,
but there were several studies done
that, and kind of the classic ones of these,
I'll read out to you.
What they basically did is they gave people glucose sugar
to increase their blood sugar before training or not.
And the kind of classic study of this is Alborg et al.
So in 1976, so it goes way back,
which is that glucose reduces fat burning and exercise.
And then some other studies, if you want to look these up,
they're very easy to find on PubMed.
You put in Horowitz, 1999, Lee et al. is another one
where they have people drink milk with glucose in it.
So sweet sugary milk before exercise, et cetera.
And you can find a number of examples
where eating before exercise reduces the amount of fat
that's oxidized during the exercise.
And you can also find a lot of studies showing
that eating during exercise or prior to exercise
will not reduce the amount of fat that's oxidized.
However, the types of exercise,
whether that was medium intensity or high intensity
or low intensity is all over the map for these studies.
So it's very hard to target an ideal protocol.
And then if you look really deep in the literature,
you start to find meta-analyses
where people have actually aggregated all the findings
and some modern studies where it points
to some very specific and useful protocols.
And so here's the rule or the protocol
that I extracted from that literature.
At a period of about 90 minutes
of moderate intensity exercise, I want to be clear,
at about or after 90 minutes of moderate intensity exercise,
there's a switchover point
whereby if you ate before the exercise,
you will reduce, excuse me, you will burn far less fat
from the 90 minute point onward
than you would if you had gone into the training fasted.
So let me repeat that.
If it's moderate intensity,
so-called zone two cardio type exercise,
at the 90 minute point,
if you happen to have eaten before the exercise
within one to three hours prior to the exercise,
then you reduce the amount of fat
that you will burn from 90 minutes onward.
Whereas if you had fasted prior to the exercise,
you hadn't eaten anything for three hours or more
prior to the exercise,
at the 90 minute point, 90 minutes of exercise,
you will start to burn more fat
than you would had you eaten.
Now, 90 minutes of moderate intensity exercise is a lot.
So that's a pretty long run.
Even if you're running at a pretty slow pace,
like a 10 or 12 minute mile, that's a lot of running.
That's a lot of swimming.
So that's a lot of walking.
That's a lot of hiking.
However, there are people who are going out hiking all day
or running all day or walking all day.
And if you want to burn more fat per unit time,
you want to oxidize more fat,
then you would do that fasted.
Now, there are also studies that point to the fact
that you don't have to wait to 90 minutes
in order to get this enhanced fat burning effect.
The studies I was able to find
and that looked to me like quality peer reviewed studies
with no company bias or no product bias of any kind.
These are studies that were largely funded
by the federal government in the university context
pointed to the fact that if one does high intensity training
or even the very high intensity forms of training
like sprints or squats or deadlifts
or any kind of activity that can't be maintained
for more than these eight or I would say up to 60 seconds.
So a set of lifting weights, repeated, repeated.
If that's done for anywhere from 20 minutes,
so weight training or powerlifting
or these kinds of things or kettlebell swings
or up to 60 minutes, well then the switchover point
in which you can burn more fat
if you go into that fasted comes earlier.
And this makes sense because there's nothing holy
about the 90 minute point
for medium intensity zone two cardio.
That 90 minute point is the point in which the body shifts
over from mainly burning glycogen, basically sugar
that comes from muscles or the liver
and realizes this is going on for a while.
I'm going to shift over to a storage site fuel
that is in reserve like body fat.
This is going to happen for a while.
So I'm going to start tapping into body fat stores.
Now fat doesn't have a little brain there.
It is innervated by neurons, but it doesn't have thoughts.
And you don't actually control this switch with your mind.
This is something that has to do with the milieu
of various hormones.
What has to happen is insulin has to go down far enough.
So if you ate before the exercise
you'd have an increase in insulin.
If you ate carbohydrates
you'd have a bigger increase in insulin.
Fat and proteins indeed will have lower amounts of insulin
and fasting will give you the lowest amount of insulin.
Well then that switchover point is going to come earlier
in the exercise.
And if you think about it
if you were to do something high intensity
for 20, 30, 40 minutes
so maybe lift weights and then get into zone two cardio.
If you were fasted, the literature says
that you're going to burn more body fat per unit time
than if you had eaten before or during the exercise.
So what does this mean?
This means if you want to burn more body fat
if it's in your protocols
and you have been approved to do this safely
exercise intensely for 20 to 60 minutes
the higher the intensity
obviously the shorter that bout is going to be
and then move over into zone two cardio.
And if you do that fasted
or the medium intensity cardio, I should say
and if you do that fasted
then indeed you will burn a higher percentage of body fat.
If you need to eat or you like to eat before you train
that also can work.
And if you train very intensely
you're likely to shift over
to the fat burning pattern more quickly as well.
So again, this isn't really an issue
of how long you exercise.
It's an issue of how intensely you exercise
and therefore what fuel source you're drawing from.
So hopefully I've made that clear
but basically you need to deplete glycogen
or through high intensity exercise
and then move to a steady state exercise
that will allow you to burn more fat
or you need to perform a medium intensity
or low intensity type exercise for a long period of time
before you shift over to burning fat.
And indeed it seems that going into all that fasted
will facilitate the burning of more fat overall.
But if you can't even get to the exercise
if you're somebody who just can't do the training at all
you're unwilling to or you're incapable of training
unless you eat something
then obviously eating something makes the most sense
and what you eat prior to exercise
that's a whole other biz that people argue about
and fight about whether or not you should go into it
with low carbohydrates or higher carb or all of that.
But in general, the theme there is very simple
which is that you want insulin levels to be pretty low
if your goal is body fat reduction
if you want to oxidize body fat.
So fasting in some cases, fat fasting in other cases
where you're just ingesting fats,
fat and protein in some cases
or for some people it will be eating carbohydrates.
I'm not here to dictate a particular nutrition regimen
that's just how the hormone balance of these things
and fat oxidation works.
Now, one thing that's very interesting
and cannot be overlooked
is this issue of how much energy you burn
during and after the activity.
And some of you probably already know about this
but the whole business of calories in versus calories out
and people counting the number of calories they burn
during their aerobic session
or during their whatever session
is only one half of the equation
and it really eclipses the more important issue
which is how much of an increase in metabolism
does a given exercise create after the exercise?
And we could talk for hours about this
but the simple way to view this
is that high intensity training,
anaerobic training of weight training, sprints, burpees
any kind of thing.
I don't know, these days I see,
I hear that you're not supposed to do burpees
that people think burpees are dangerous.
So I'm not suggesting any particular movements here.
You have to decide what's right for you.
I do burpees, I don't seem to be injured from them
but I hear that they're terrible for some people.
So anyway, pushups, sit ups, whatever it happens to be
that anaerobic exercise that's of higher intensity
or sprints taps into glycogen stores during the movement
and will burn more energy per unit time
than moderate intensity.
High intensity burns more than moderate intensity.
That's straightforward.
What's interesting is that all the studies
that I was able to find on what happens
after that type of exercise
showed that the percentage of fat that you burn
after high intensity exercise is actually greater
in other words, you burn a lot of glycogen
during the high intensity exercise
and then after the exercise,
the post-exercise oxygen consumption
as it's sometimes called goes up.
We know this after you train intensely
that post-exercise oxygen consumption goes up
sometimes for up to 24 hours.
And it is during that period of time
that you oxidize more fat, not glycogen.
Now what's interesting is that the reverse is also true
for people that do long bouts
of low or moderate intensity exercise.
So typically this would be things like running,
swimming, biking, et cetera.
So 60, 90 minutes, two hours,
maybe even people that are training for marathons
or half marathons.
When they stop training, they burn more glycogen,
more carbohydrate, even though they were burning
more body fat per unit time
during the low intensity exercise.
So there's this kind of inversion.
High intensity burns more glycogen during the activity,
more body fat afterwards.
Moderate to low intensity burns more percentage-wise,
more body fat is oxidized than glycogen
during the actual exercise.
Afterward, it's more glycogen.
So I don't want this to get too complicated.
The point is you should pick exercise that you like,
that you're going to do regularly,
but it does seem that the high intensity exercise
followed by moderate intensity exercise
is going to be optimal for fat burning overall
because when you look at the percentage of body fat burned
and you look at the overall increase
in basal metabolic rate,
moderate and high intensity training
followed by low intensity training,
or even just followed by going back into life
is going to be the best way to continue to burn body fat
because of the ways that it increases basal metabolic rate.
Now, this could be distilled into a simple protocol
whereby three or four times a week
you do high intensity training followed by either nothing
or followed by low intensity training,
especially if you're able to do that fasted.
And I should just mention that none of this stuff
about fasted is about performance.
If you want to perform really well,
this is for reasons of performance
and it's for a sport or a competition,
it's not for body fat purposes,
well, then all of this kind of falls away
and is modified by what's ideal to eat for performance.
But what we're talking about today
is how to optimize body fat, body fat loss.
So train moderately to intensely to very high intensity
and then moderate to low intensity
or train moderate to high intensity and then go about life.
And in fact, I have a friend who uses this strategy.
He likes to train intensely and not that often protocol
because he's a very busy person.
So he'll train for 20 or 30 minutes intensely with weights
or just body weight movement, doing a lot of,
he does burpees and pushups and sit ups and pull ups
and just kind of moving and kind of circuit type training.
But where he's breathing really hard,
the goal he always says is I want to breathe hard
for 30 minutes every day.
And then afterwards he hydrates and drinks coffee
and moves into his day and he's walking around
and taking calls and carrying around his children
and doing all these kinds of things
that keep him really busy
with kind of like low intensity work.
So I think you get the principle now,
but you should all be asking yourselves
as scientists of yourselves,
why would it be that certain patterns of exercise
would lead to more or less fat loss?
I mean, it can't just be about the energy burned.
We already established that.
And again, it has to do with the neurons.
It has to do with how we engage the nervous system.
So while non-exercise activity induced thermogenesis,
NEAT, the fidgeting, and cold can induce thermogenesis
by engaging shiver type movement or low level movements,
big movements that are of very high intensity,
meaning they require a lot of effort,
deploy a lot of adrenaline epinephrine from our neurons
and signal particular types and amounts
of fat thermogenesis, fat oxidation.
Whereas low level intensity exercise,
low or moderate intensity exercise,
walking, running, biking, where you can do that easily,
there's not very much adrenaline release.
So adrenaline and AKA epinephrine
is really the final common path
by which movement of any kind,
whether or not it's low level shiver
or whether or not it's lifting a barbell,
sprinting up a hill or doing a long bike ride,
adrenaline is the effector of fat loss.
It's the trigger and it's the effector.
So now I want to turn our attention
to compounds that increase epinephrine and adrenaline,
as well as compounds that work outside
the adrenaline epinephrine pathway
to increase the rates of fat loss.
I almost always save compounds and supplements
and things of that sort to the end,
because I do believe that people should look first
towards behavioral tools
and an understanding of the science
before they look toward a supplement
or a particular thing that they can extract from diet.
This is mainly to try and shift people away
from the kind of magic pill phenomenon
or the idea that there is a magic pill,
because there really isn't
and frankly there never will be.
But there are some compounds
that can greatly increase fat oxidation and mobilization
and understanding which compounds
increase oxidation or mobilization
can be very useful if your goal is to accelerate fat loss.
There are things that people can ingest
that will allow them to oxidize more fat.
And that occurs mainly by increasing the amount
of epinephrine that is released from neurons
that innervate fat tissue.
One of the more common ones
is one that you may already be using, which is caffeine.
It's well-established that caffeine can enhance performance
if you're caffeine adapted.
I talked about this in an earlier episode,
so I want to make sure I'm very clear about this.
If you are not used to drinking caffeine
and you suddenly decide I'm going to drink
a big cup of coffee before training,
you will vasoconstrict and you will limit performance.
So that's performance.
If you're caffeine adapted, however,
there's this kind of interesting phenomenon
where ingestion of caffeine serves more
as a performance enhancer, both by increasing alertness,
but also by way of dilating vasculature,
of allowing more blood flow.
Now, caffeine for burning more fat,
for oxidizing and mobilizing more fat
is an interesting one.
It can be effective at dosages up to 400 milligrams.
You have to be careful if you're caffeine sensitive.
Some people have just the littlest bit of caffeine
and their mind goes crazy and they're very uncomfortable.
It can have cardiovascular effects for some people
with hypertension, et cetera.
So please check with your doctor.
But 400 milligrams is roughly a cup and a half of coffee
or two cups of coffee.
Nowadays, there's a lot more caffeine in coffee.
So if you go to a typical cafe
and you were to get their medium size,
that would have close to a gram of caffeine,
which is why if you're a regular caffeine consumer
and you don't get that gram of caffeine
in your coffee each day, you will get a headache.
It can cause constriction and dilation of blood vessels
in ways that's complicated, but you'll get a headache.
Some people like the way they feel,
drinking 100 to 200, 300,
maybe in 400 milligrams of caffeine before training.
And indeed that will lead to increased fat oxidation.
It will do that because you will release
more epinephrine and adrenaline.
So let's just place this in the context
of what we said previously.
Let's say you normally do zone two cardio.
So you're going out for a moderately intense run
for 30 to 60 minutes or so.
I think the current recommendation guidelines in the States
are that people engage in 30 minutes
of moderate intensity exercise five days a week
for, so that's 150 minutes,
if their goal is to improve or maintain health
of the cardiovascular system.
80% of people in the United States fail to do that
or anything close to it.
We are way below threshold
for what the government has recommended.
In this case, the government recommendations, I think,
are pretty good.
One could always do better, of course,
but 80% of people aren't even doing that.
However, just using the logic and the understanding
of how epinephrine, adrenaline is affecting
this fat oxidation process.
If you were to go out for 15 minutes
and you drank caffeine before you went,
yes, you will probably oxidize more fat per unit time.
Can you compensate for the exercise you're not doing
just by drinking caffeine?
Well, probably if you were just talking about fat loss,
if that caffeine makes you fidget a lot, right?
The amount of calories that you burn in a 30 minute run,
unless the run is very intense
and you're wearing a weight vest and it's up a hill,
it's not that great, right?
But you probably get somewhere
into the 400, 500 calories burned area.
But I said earlier,
and there are a lot of data now that support
that fidgeting for a day can burn anywhere
from 800 to 2,500 calories a day.
So you might say, well, fidgeting is better than running.
Ah, but it doesn't trigger the activation
and the positive health effects of the cardiovascular system.
So fidgeting alone can be great,
but you need exercise for other reasons.
Caffeine can enhance the amount of fat that you burn
in any duration of exercise,
and it can shift the percentage of fat that you oxidize
compared to glycogen, unless you take that caffeine
and it ramps you up so much
that you're training really, really intensely.
The bottom line is if you like caffeine
and you can use it safely,
ingesting somewhere between 100 and 400 milligrams
of caffeine prior to exercise,
somewhere between 30 to 40 minutes before exercise
can be beneficial if we're talking about fat oxidation,
burning more body fat.
So that's caffeine.
There are a number of other things that have existed
over the years that are in this pathway,
things like ephedrine, which is now illegal in most states,
I think maybe in all states
because people were dropping dead from taking ephedrine
because they were heating up too much.
It's interesting, it wasn't direct effects
on the heart causing heart attack.
It could trigger by way of adrenergic receptors,
if you'd like to know,
increases in body temperature and heat.
Now, those drugs turned out to be dangerous
because people were overheating and dying.
There was also the big Fen-Fen craze.
There was a drug that was released, fenfluramine,
which actually was quite effective as an anti-obesity drug,
a treatment for obesity.
That had to be outlawed as well.
It was, FDA approval was removed because again,
people were dying because of cardiovascular effects.
I don't know if people were overheating on it as well.
So what is the solution?
If caffeine is the kind of the entry point
for most people of using compounds to increase the rate
or percentage of fat loss in exercise and even at rest,
what are some of the other things
that are useful and interesting?
Well, in terms of tools that are actionable
and have reasonable safety margins,
I've talked before about something called GLP-1.
This is something that can be triggered
by the ingestion of yerba mate, which is a tea.
And I guess because I'm half Argentine,
they grew up drinking mate.
I think I was drinking mate
from the time I was about three or four years old.
I don't suggest that for kids.
I don't think kids should be ingesting caffeine.
But anyway, I did it and I still ingest mate.
Mate increases GLP-1.
GLP-1 is in the glucagon pathway.
So let's just quickly return to our biochemistry.
As you recall, fat is mobilized from body fat stores
and then it's burned up, it's oxidized in cells.
It actually needs to be converted into ATP.
And those fatty acids are essentially converted into ATP
in the mitochondria of the cell.
High insulin prevents that from happening.
And glucagon facilitates that process.
Glucagon facilitates that process through increases in GLP-1.
The short takeaway is mate increases GLP-1
and yes, increases the percentage of fat that you'll burn.
It increases fat burning.
And that is especially true, it turns out,
from the scientific literature,
if you ingest mate prior to exercise of any kind.
So if you want to burn more fat,
drinking mate before exercise is good.
Drinking it at rest when you're not exercising
will also help shift your metabolism
toward enhanced burning of fat by increasing fat oxidation.
Now there's a whole category of pharmaceuticals
that's being developed right now
that are in late stage trials
or are in use for the treatment of diabetes,
which capitalize on this GLP-1 pathway.
They go by various names
and there are people on the internet
who are selling these things.
They are prescription drugs.
And I want to emphasize that they are prescription drugs.
And you obviously wouldn't want to use any of these
without a prescription and a requirement.
It does seem that they are effective
for the treatment of certain kinds of diabetes
and lead to fairly significant weight loss
and reduction in appetite.
So this is kind of the modern version of GLP-1
is pharmaceuticals of GLP-1 metabolism
are drugs such as semaglutide.
I can never pronounce this.
Can't seem to pronounce many things it seems.
Semaglutide is the way I would pronounce it.
S-E-M-A-G-L-U-T-I-D-E.
Semaglutide, but that's not the way you pronounce it.
But semaglutide is the way
that it's been described on the internet.
In any case, this compound increases GLP-1.
It's actually a GLP-1 analog in some cases
and they go by various types of trade names.
So the GLP-1 pathway is interesting.
Most people, including myself,
are not interested in taking a prescription drug
to increase GLP-1.
I do it through the ingestion of mate.
I just get the mate leaves, pour water over it and drink it.
What's kind of interesting that's not often discussed
is that you can increase the amount of GLP-1
by, you can essentially reuse the tea.
The first time you drink it, it's going to be very,
very intense.
In fact, some people find that mate,
it almost tastes like burnt leaves.
It's too intense.
You don't want the water to be too hot.
But I learned this trick from a friend.
You can reuse the leaves over and over again,
probably for about a day before they go bad.
And in doing that, you start to extract
more and more of the compounds
from the mate leaf that increased GLP-1.
So it's kind of cool.
You can kind of get an increased effect.
So what I'll typically do is make
about 16 to 30 ounces of it
and just sip it throughout the day.
And I do like it before I train.
Some people who don't like mate
might prefer something like guayusa,
which is spelled G-U-A-Y-U-S-A.
G-U-A-Y-U-S-A, guayusa,
which is from Ecuador, despite the USA ending to it.
It's from Ecuador.
And it's a sweeter tasting tea.
It doesn't have any sweetener in it,
but the leaf of the guayusa plant
is sweeter than the mate plant.
I sometimes will mix the two
and then make the tea with that.
There's no mate or guayusa sponsor of the podcast.
These are just tools to increase GLP-1 and fat oxidation.
And again, the semaglutide is the prescription version
where it's kind of the heavy artillery GLP-1 stimulant.
And again, should be only explored with a prescription.
So those are the compounds
that really increase fat oxidation directly.
There are going to be a number of things
that impact insulin and glucagon
that are going to shift the body toward more fat burning.
We talked about a lot of these
during the episode on hormones.
We talked about it,
we did a whole episode on hormones and metabolism.
And so for instance, berberine, which comes from a plant
or metformin are compounds that are now
in kind of growing use for reducing blood glucose.
They are very potent at reducing blood glucose,
which will reduce insulin
because the job of the hormone insulin
is to essentially manage glucose in the bloodstream.
So there are a huge gallery of compounds
that will reduce insulin
and thereby can increase fat oxidation.
And that's because, as I mentioned before,
fat oxidation, this conversion of fatty acids into ATP
in the mitochondria is inhibited by insulin.
So if you keep insulin low,
you're going to increase that process,
which brings us full circle back
to the issue of diet and nutrition.
There is really solid evidence
from the Gardner lab at Stanford and from other labs
showing that when you look at different diets,
you look at low-fat diets, high-fat diets,
keto diets, intermittent fasting.
Provided people stick to their particular diet,
it doesn't really matter which diet you follow.
You can still get a caloric deficit and you get weight loss.
Adherence, however, is always an issue.
And so what I always say is
that you want to use the eating plan
that is obviously beneficial to your health,
but the one that allows you to adhere to whatever it is
that the particular nutrition protocol is, right?
If you can't stick with something,
then it's not very worthwhile.
But from the purely scientific standpoint,
there's also an advantage to keeping insulin low.
Now that doesn't necessarily mean
you go to zero carbohydrate.
I've talked before about my preferred way of eating
is to go low or no carbohydrate throughout the day
for alertness, to get that adrenaline release
and the focus that goes with it, et cetera,
and the ability to think and move
and do all the things I need to do during the day.
And then I eat carbohydrates at night
because it facilitates the transition to sleep.
That's what works for me.
But when insulin is low,
you do place your system in a position to oxidize more fat.
And so that's why I think a lot of people do see benefit
from lower carbohydrate or moderate carbohydrate diets
because when insulin is low,
you are in a position to oxidize more fat,
both from exercise and at rest.
And I should mention, because I often mention
and it's appropriate to mention
that if you're interested in looking at the effects
of caffeine, of mate, guayusa, things of that sort, GLP-1,
you want to learn more about those,
you can go to this wonderful website,
which is free, examine.com.
You can put in Yerba Mate.
It will describe the three studies
that show increased fat oxidation,
both during exercise and at rest.
And as a consequence, not surprisingly,
an increase in metabolic rate.
One thing that's interesting about mate
is it causes a slight decrease in heart rate
for reasons that still escape me.
There's a single study showing
that heart rate is slightly reduced,
which is kind of nice
because if when I drink too much caffeine,
my heart rate goes up,
maybe that would increase my fidgeting and my fat burning,
but I don't like the feeling
of having my basal heart rate being up too high.
I like my heart rate elevated during exercise,
but not when I'm just kind of resting
or working throughout the day.
And for some reason that I don't understand,
there's an effect of mate of increasing fat oxidation,
but reducing heart rate just slightly.
So that's interesting and it probably lends itself
to my, explains the subjective experience that I've had
of that mate is kind of a nice, even, mellow stimulant.
It's not this really supercharged stimulant
like caffeine from coffee or other sources.
Although if you drink too much mate,
it will also make you jittery.
And there's one more compound
that I think we should discuss
in terms of increasing fat loss,
and that's carnitine or acetyl-L-carnitine.
They lie in the same pathway.
We can return to our basic knowledge now
of fat mobilization and oxidation.
After fat is mobilized and makes it into cells
and needs to be oxidized,
so literally the burning of fat
and conversion of it into energy,
that is accomplished and is facilitated
by the presence of glucagon being elevated,
GLP increases that process,
and insulin being low.
And we talked about some ways to manage insulin,
both in this episode and in previous episode.
L-carnitine and acetyl-L-carnitine in particular
facilitates fat oxidation.
It helps convert fatty acids into ATP.
And indeed supplementing L-carnitine can increase fat loss.
That's been shown.
At what dosages?
Well, people ingest anywhere from 500 milligrams
to two grams per day in divided doses typically.
Some people who are really extreme
are taking injectable L-carnitine.
I've certainly not tried that.
I confess I have used it in pill form from time to time,
but in part because of the fat oxidation effects,
but also because of the other effects
that it tends to have.
So in exploring the effects that L-carnitine has,
it has a huge variety of effects on cellular metabolism.
It can reduce ammonia in the blood.
That is actually a quite strong effect.
It can reduce things like C-reactive protein,
which is you want C-reactive protein levels to be managed.
You do not want them too high.
Can slightly reduce blood glucose.
It can slightly increase HDLC,
the good form of the blood lipid,
and slightly reduce overall cholesterol.
And as I mentioned,
it can slightly modify the pathway involving glucagon
such that you get a considerable effect,
not a huge effect on fat oxidation.
So it can improve fat oxidation rates.
It has a number of other effects,
some of which I talked about during the month on hormones
and that sort of thing.
It has strong effects on rates of pregnancy
and sperm quality.
So clearly carnitine is doing lots of different things
in lots of different cells.
It's impacting sperm motility.
There are a large number of studies supporting that.
Slight reductions in blood pressure.
N has these interesting effects on reducing fatigue
during exercise, reducing inflammatory markers
like interleukin-6.
So it has a number of effects that on the whole
are quote unquote positive,
or at least in the direction of things that you may want.
And I should emphasize may.
You certainly don't need acetyl-L-carnitine
in order to lose fat,
but now that you understand the cellular process
by which fat is mobilized and oxidized,
it should make sense that if L-carnitine is important
for converting fatty acids into energy,
then supplementing L-carnitine makes sense.
Acetyl-L-carnitine is the type of L-carnitine
or the form of L-carnitine, I should say,
that is transported and utilized most easily by the body.
And so that's why sometimes we distinguish
between L-carnitine and acetyl-L-carnitine.
So once again, we've covered an enormous amount of material.
We've talked about the science of fat loss.
And in particular, we've explored this topic
from the perspective of the nervous system,
how neurons, and in particular,
the release of things like adrenaline, epinephrine,
can facilitate fat mobilization and oxidation.
We talked about NEAT, fidgeting,
this non-exercise type movement
that can greatly increase caloric burn and why that is.
We talked about shiver,
another form of non-exercise movement
that can really increase both caloric expenditure
due to the shiver, due to the movement,
as well as increased thermogenesis,
the heating up of the body through things like brown fat,
and even the conversion of white fat to brown fat,
which is a good thing if you want to oxidize fat.
We talked about cold as a particular stimulus
to induce shiver and how to use getting into and out of cold
as a way to stimulate shiver and avoid cold adaptation
so that you continue to oxidize and burn fat,
if that's your goal.
If you want to check out the protocols for that,
they're at thecoldplunge.com.
And in weeks to come,
we're going to be adding more protocols to that website,
not just for fat loss, but for things like resilience,
reducing inflammation, et cetera.
So be sure to check those out.
Again, those are totally cost-free.
Talked about exercise,
how rather than thinking about cardiovascular
or weight training exercise,
that we should perhaps look through the lens
of this adrenaline system
and how it interacts with fat stores
and think about low, medium, or high intensity exercise,
whether or not we show up to that fasted or not.
Turns out showing up to that fasted can be useful
if you start with high intensity movements
and then move into lower intensity type exercise.
If you're going to go long duration,
it probably doesn't matter
unless you're exercising longer than 90 minutes,
whether or not you eat or not.
We talked about caffeine as a stimulant
and a stimulus for epinephrine and adrenaline release
as a way to access more fat metabolism.
And we talked about compounds that come from things
like yerba mate and guayusa tea,
this GLP-1 pathway that can trigger increased fat oxidation
so much so that the pharmaceutical companies
are now developing compounds specifically to increase GLP-1
for treatment of diabetes and obesity.
But you can leverage the GLP-1 pathway
through the ingestion of things like mate or guayusa
if that's of interest to you.
And then we talked about L-carnitine
and how L-carnitine itself is critical
for the fat oxidation within individual cells,
the conversion of fatty acids to energy
and why having your insulin low
and things like L-carnitine and glucagon levels
high or sufficient at least
to can facilitate the burning of fat, fat oxidation.
So we covered a lot of material.
That's a lot of protocols.
I realize, and that didn't,
the little list I just gave right there
didn't even begin to get into all the details
and corners that we discussed.
I hope you found this conversation interesting
both for sake of understanding fat loss
and how to lose fat more quickly
and to lose more of it if that's your goal,
as well as simply to understand the biology
of fat metabolism from a different perspective,
from the perspective of the nervous system.
If you're enjoying this podcast
and you're benefiting from the information
that you're learning, please subscribe on YouTube.
That really helps us a lot.
There's also a notifications button that you can hit
that will notify you anytime we release new content.
We release new episodes every Monday
but sometimes we release additional material in between.
So please do subscribe on YouTube as well.
If you could subscribe on Apple and or Spotify,
that's terrific and really helps us.
And at Apple, you can give us a five-star review
if you think we deserve a five-star review
as well as you have the opportunity
to give us feedback at Apple.
The comments section on YouTube
is the place to give us feedback,
whether or not you like an episode,
whether or not you don't like an episode,
aspects that you particularly liked,
suggestions for future content.
We do read, I do read through all the comments.
It takes me some time.
I sometimes fall a little bit behind
depending on other duties, but I read all the comments
and I do take them into account
when developing this material
and the structure of the material.
So please do provide feedback in the comment section.
We really appreciate it.
Other ways to support the podcast
are to check out the sponsors that we mentioned
at the beginning of the podcast.
That's a terrific way to support us.
As well, we have a Patreon.
It's patreon.com slash Andrew Huberman.
And at Patreon, that will allow you to support the podcast
at any level that you like.
I've mentioned supplements during the podcast.
If you're interested in taking supplements,
you might want to check out Thorne, T-H-O-R-N-E.
We've partnered with Thorne
because they have the highest levels of stringency
in terms of the quality of the ingredients they use
and the amounts of the ingredients that they use.
If you want to see the supplements that I take,
you can go to Thorne, T-H-O-R-N-E dot com
slash the letter U slash Huberman.
And you can get 20% off any of the supplements
that are there as well as any of the supplements
that Thorne makes.
That's Thorne, T-H-O-R-N-E dot com slash U,
the letter U slash Huberman to get 20% off
any of the supplements that Thorne makes.
And last but not least,
I want to thank you for your time and attention today
and thank you for your interest in science.
I'll see you next time.